Dengue fever symptoms
If you develop dengue fever, symptoms usually begin about 4 to 10 daysTrusted Source after the initial infection. In many cases, symptoms will be mild. They may be mistaken for symptoms of the flu or another infection.

Young children and people who’ve never experienced infection may have a milder illness than older children and adults. Common symptoms generally last for 2 to 7 days and can includeTrusted Source:

sudden, high fever (up to 106°F or 41°C)
severe headache
swollen lymph glands
severe joint and muscle pains
skin rash (appearing between 2 and 5 days after the initial fever)
Symptoms of severe dengue can include:

belly pain and tenderness
mild to severe vomiting (three times in 24 hours)
mild bleeding from the nose or gums
vomiting blood or blood in stool
fatigue, restlessness, or irritability
Diagnosing dengue fever
Doctors use blood tests to check for antibodies the dengue viruses or the presence of infection. A doctor may use a virological test or a serological test.

Virological test
This test directly tests for elements of the virus. This type of testing often requires specialized equipment and a staff that’s technically trained, so this type of testing may not be available in all medical facilities.

Serological test
This test detects antibodies in the blood to confirm a current or recent infection.

If you experience dengue symptoms after traveling outside the country, you should see a healthcare professional to check whether you have the virus.


Treating dengue fever
There’s no medicationTrusted Source or treatment specifically made for dengue infection.

If you believe you may have dengue, you should use over-the-counter pain relievers to reduce your fever, headache, and joint pain. However, you should avoid aspirin and ibuprofen, as they can cause more bleeding.

Your doctor will perform a medical exam, and you should rest and drink plenty of fluids. If you feel worse after the first 24 hours of illness — once your fever has gone down — you should be taken to the hospital as soon as possible to check for complications.

Complications of dengue fever
A small percentage of people who have dengue fever can develop a more serious form of disease known as dengue hemorrhagic feverTrusted Source.

Dengue hemorrhagic fever
The risk factors for developing dengue hemorrhagic fever include having antibodiesTrusted Source to dengue virus from a previous infection and a weakenedTrusted Source immune system.

This rare form of the disease is characterized by:

high fever
damage to the lymphatic system
damage to blood vessels
bleeding from the nose
bleeding under the skin
internal bleeding
bleeding from the gums
liver enlargement
circulatory system failure
The symptoms of dengue hemorrhagic fever can trigger dengue shock syndrome, which is also characterized byTrusted Source low blood pressure, weak pulse, cold, clammy skin, and restlessness. Dengue shock syndrome is severe and can lead to excessive bleeding and even death.


How to prevent dengue fever
There’s now a new dengue vaccineTrusted Source called Dengvaxia that was approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) in 2019. It’s available in some countries and requires three doses spread 6 months apart.

The best method of protection is to avoid mosquito bites and to reduce the mosquito population. When in a high risk area, you shouldTrusted Source do the following:

Avoid heavily populated residential areas.
Use mosquito repellent indoors and outdoors.
Wear long-sleeved shirts and pants tucked into socks.
Use air conditioning instead of opening windows.
Ensure that window and door screens are secure and that any holes are repaired.
Use mosquito nets if sleeping areas aren’t screened.
Reducing the mosquito population involves getting rid of mosquito breeding areas. These areas include any place where still water can collect, such as:

birdbaths
pet dishes
empty planters
flower pots
cans
any empty vessel
These areas should be checked, emptied, or changed regularly.

