MASS CASUALTY – INTERAGENCY INTEGRATED TRIAGE TOOL (MC-IITT)
Overview
The MC - IITT describes how to assign patient acuity categories during the initial phases of MCI response. This tool
provides a smooth transition from the facility-based routine IITT. The MC - IITT categorises patients into 5 colour
categories. There are three main colours (Red, Yellow and Green), and a fourth colour (Blue) which is a subset of the
Red category. The fifth colour, Grey, corresponds to deceased patients. Categorisation is based on clinical criteria and
aligns with the structured approach to any emergency patient. This tool is designed to be easy to implement in all
resource settings, including those with significant constraints.
The MC - IITT emphasises early re-assessment with a detailed evaluation of ABCDE conditions and high-risk vital signs.
If re-assessment is delayed due to surge conditions, triage should be repeated with MC - IITT. Further changesto triage
category may be needed based on patient assessment or clinician concern. Patients may become more critical over
time, requiring “up triage” to a more serious category. Initial interventions, such as fluid resuscitation, may
temporarily improve a patient’s condition, but great care should be taken before assigning a patient to a lower acuity
if they have not received definitive treatment.
Table 1: Mass Casualty IITT Categories
Category Description
Red
Non-walking patients with signs of critical life-threatening conditions.
Red signs include any findings of:
• airway compromise OR
• respiratory distress OR
• major (massive or catastrophic) haemorrhage or absent radial pulse or capillary
refill > 3 sec OR
• altered mental state or unresponsiveness OR
• massive burns (> 40%) OR
• clinician concern.
Patients initially categorized as green or yellow may be re-triaged to red on assessment.
Yellow Non-walking patients who do not have any red signs or high-risk vital signs.
Green
Walking patients.
In the green area, patients are assessed and if they have any red signs or high-risk vital
signs, they are re-categorised.
IMPLEMENTING MASS CASUALTY TRIAGE
Resources for mass casualty triage including space, staff and supplies should be carefully planned to provide
appropriate care for each triage category. This guidance will only address the essential space issues around
www.who.int/emergencycare | emergencycare@who.int 3
implementing MC-IITT. Please see the WHOA MCM course for an expanded explanation of essential space, staff and
supplies.
Space
During surge, area designation facilitates safe and effective patient flow. The term zone is used below to indicate a
dedicated, pre-assigned area for a specific set of patients. Dedicated areas of the facility should be pre-identified to
be used for a specific clinical function: triage point, red zone, yellow zone, green zone. The areas and transit routes
between them must have clear signage to identify care areas and direct flow.
• Triage points: The first triage point is ideally located at the health facility entrance, preferably outside the facility
building, with a single-entry point. Initial triage to walking/non-walking patients is performed here. A secondary
triage point to assign non-walking patients to red or yellow category occurs ideally outside but close to the main
EU. The space within the EU must be protected for care delivery. In smaller facilities or lower resource settings,
first and second triage may occur in the same place.
● Red zone: The red zone is within the EU and reserved for the most acutely ill patients – red category patients. The
red zone has the highest concentration of resources to care for acute life threats.
● Yellow zone: The yellow zone may be located inside the EU, or in another clinical area nearby, and is only for
patients categorized as yellow. The yellow zone should be close enough to the red zone for patients who acutely
decompensate and need to be moved.
● Green zone: The green zone should be separate from the EU to decongest high acuity areas and provide a safe
space for treatment and monitoring of low acuity patients for potential deterioration. Some examples of common
locations used include the outpatient department, the hospital waiting area or a separate tent.
Take care not to overwhelm these areas, as doing so can simply move the mass casualty burden from one part of the
facility to another.
Patient Triage Categories and Flow
During an MCI, ALL arriving patients should be triaged with the MC - IITT. This includes trauma patients, medical
emergencies and non-MCI related patients. Despite high volumes in the EU, patient flow must be preserved.
Movement from triage points to the clinical areas must be unidirectional (one-way). To support this, only initial
resuscitation interventions are performed in the EU. Further patient care should take place in other parts of the facility
(e.g. wards, critical care units, operating theatres) to ensure that there is space and resources for newly arriving
patients.
STEP 1: Patients arrive at health facility and are categorized as walking /non walking. Walking patients are directed to
the green zone. Body parts should be directed to the morgue and not enter the clinical care space.
STEP 2: Patients who are unable to walk are directed to a triage point at the entrance to the EU where they are
assessed for any red signs. If any signs of immediate threat to life are present, the patient is triaged Red and
transferred to the Red Zone. If there are no red signs, transfer the patient to the Yellow Zone.
In some locations, if there is adequate staffing, senior clinicians may be positioned at Step 2 triage area. Depending
on patient volumes, these clinicians may be able to assess for Grey criteria, allowing direct transfer to the morgue,
further decompressing the Red Zone.
RED ZONE: The Red Zone should be staffed with a larger proportion of clinicians, preferably those who are more
experienced. In the Red Zone, the focus is on immediate life- and limb- saving ABCDE interventions and rapid decision
making on disposition to in-patient areas for ongoing care, such as the critical care unit or the operating theatre.
www.who.int/emergencycare | emergencycare@who.int 4
Red patients: Red patients undergo rapid assessment and management following an ABCDE approach (add
reference for e.g., BEC). Interventions should prioritize resuscitation, life-saving interventions, rapid decision
making on disposition, and handover to inpatient care (e.g., surgery, intensive care).
Blue patients: If a senior clinician identifies a red patient who exceeds the present capacity for curative efforts,
the patient is categorised as blue. Patients with Blue criteria should be cared for by dedicated staff. These
patients should be placed in a pre-designated space, preferably adjacent to the Red Zone. Senior clinicians
should communicate decisions clearly with staff working in these zones. Patient condition and category should
be reassessed if new resources become available.
YELLOW ZONE: Patients who do not meet the criteria for either Red or Green are triaged as Yellow. These patients
are rapidly moved to the designated Yellow Zone which may be in a separate part of the EU (if there is space) or on a
ward close to the EU. In the Yellow Zone, patients are assessed and receive appropriate ABCDE interventions, and
decisions on disposition are made. If there are any high-risk vital signs or if there is clinician concern, the patient should
be transferred to the Red Zone. Patients are monitored and cared for while awaiting admission to other areas of the
hospitals or transfer to other facilities.
GREEN ZONE: Any walking patients should be quickly moved to a low-acuity area - the Green Zone. On arrival to the
Green Zone, patients should be rapidly assessed and prioritized by clinical indication. If there are too many patients
in the green zone to rapidly receive a clinical assessment, the MC-IITT should be repeated to quickly identify patients
who are decompensating. Patients found to have a life- or limb threatening condition require transfer to the
appropriate clinical area (e.g., red zone).
The Green Zone should be staffed with clinicians who can rapidly evaluate patients. Patients sorted to the Green Zone
require reassessment, evaluation, treatment and appropriate disposition. Patients may require ongoing monitoring
and reassessment at regular intervals to ensure they do not deteriorate. Patients may be deemed fit for transfer or
discharge after full evaluation, depending on the context. Other Green Zone patients may require admission to
inpatient wards for ongoing care.

CONCLUSION
Triage is a dynamic process. Patient conditions evolve and capacity to provide curative treatment may change. Patient
condition and category should be frequently reassessed. By following a systematic, validated triage approach,
designating zones for varying acuity levels, and ensuring preparedness through a robust mass casualty management
plan, healthcare facilities can mitigate the impact of mass casualty incidents on both acute and routine care, thereby
achieving the greatest good for the greatest number of patients.
