What sources should I use
for information and advice?
An infodemic, with too much information
including false or misleading information,
can intensify during emergencies when
people are unsure about what they need to
do to protect themselves and those around
them. To protect yourself from false
information:
get information, advice
and guidance from
official sources, such as
your national and local
health authority; and
always check the source
and analyse the content
before sharing it with
others.
World Health Organization
Regional Office for Europe
UN City, Marmorvej 51,
DK-2100 Copenhagen Ø, Denmark
Tel.: +45 45 33 70 00
Fax: +45 45 33 70 01
Email: eurocontact@who.int
Website: www.who.int/europe
Protecting your health
before, during and after
floods
© World Health Organization 2024. Some rights reserved. This work is available under the CC BY-NC-SA
3.0 IGO license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/igo).
After a flood, avoid
walking or driving
through flood water or
entering unstable
buildings or structures.
There may be hidden
hazards, such as holes or
fast-flowing water.
How can I avoid drowning
or injury in floodwaters?
Floodwater can pose a drowning risk even if
you know how to swim. It can contain
things, such as sharp objects and downed
power lines, that may harm health. The
following actions can help you prevent or
minimize the direct health consequences
from flooding.
Always keep yourself informed by using official sources
of information and follow guidance from your local
authorities.
If you are stranded on something above the flood
water, such as a tree or building, wait there for
rescue and do not enter the water.
Only try to rescue pets or farm animals if it is safe to
do so.
Only return home if you have been advised that it is
safe to do so.
If you are advised to evacuate your home, take your
essential portable belongings, such as health records
and medicines you might need in the short term, in a
waterproof bag. If requested not to evacuate, move to
a safe location, recommended by the local authorities,
with essential items.
Follow local news and
weather updates, or use
mobile apps for real-time
alerts as well as
information from national
and local authorities on
the risks of flooding in
your area.
What measures can I take to
prepare for floods?
Getting prepared for floods is crucial for
reducing health risks. Follow these steps to
mitigate the potential health risks and
consequences associated with floods.
Prepare emergency and first aid kits. Pack essential
items, including necessary medicines, medical
records and first aid supplies in waterproof bags.
Store extra food and water for your household in
case of flooding.
Store medical records and birth certificates in
waterproof containers.
Notify local authorities about any additional support
you or your family members, such as older adults or
people with disabilities or limited mobility, might
need in the event of a flood.
Stay informed about local evacuation plans,
emergency assembly points and shelters in case of
flooding.
Keep toxic substances on platforms above potential
flood levels to prevent contamination.
How can I recognize
hypothermia?
Staying in water under 20 °C for a long time
can increase hypothermia risks. It happens
when body temperature falls below 35 °C.
Signs of hypothermia are
shivering; pale, cold and dry
skin – skin and lips may be
blue; slurred speech;
tiredness or confusion; and
slow breathing.
A baby with hypothermia may be:
cold to touch and their skin may be red
flaccid
unusually quiet and sleepy and may refuse to feed.
If you are around a person with hypothermia,
administer first aid by:
removing any wet clothing, wrapping them in a
blanket, sleeping bag or dry towel, and making sure
their head is covered;
giving them a warm non-alcoholic drink and, if
they’re fully awake, some sugary food, such as
chocolate;
keeping them awake until help arrives; and
making sure you or someone else stays with them.
moving the person indoors or somewhere sheltered
as quickly as possible, if it’s safe to do so;
How do I deal with dead
animals?
Animals that can’t escape rising
floodwaters may drown, get sick or die.
People should avoid
touching or handling dead
animals; instead, they
should call the relevant
local authorities to do so.
This includes not touching,
collecting or eating dead
fish.
wear protective clothing and observe basic
hygiene;
If you are working to clean up areas containing
animal carcasses:
keep hands clean to prevent infection with
diseases that may be transmitted by farm animals;
secure all food sources and remove animal
carcasses to avoid attracting rats; and
wear insect repellent when outdoors.
ensure that all
entrances and
windows are sealed to
prevent the entry of
rodents into the
property;
cover skin lesions with
waterproof dressings;
wear rubber boots, waterproof gloves, goggles and a
face mask if you go into flood water, to avoid
contamination from rodents or snake bites;
If your home is in an area
with stagnant or
standing water, use
mosquito repellent,
following the instructions
on the label, and apply it
to clothes or skin.
How can I protect myself
from diseases spread by
rodents, mosquitoes and
snakes?
After a flood, there is a risk of getting ill with
diseases transmitted by rodents, mosquitoes,
as well as snake bites. If you or someone you
know becomes ill, seek medical help.
Rodents can be displaced from their normal habitat,
such as sewers, due to flooding and seek places where
they can find food and shelter, such as in people’s
homes. Rats’ droppings and urine can contaminate
food and spread diseases. To prevent such risks:
do not leave pet food out in the open; and
keep your food in sealed containers, in a dry place
out of the reach of rodents;
Floods may lead to more mosquitoes, which can carry
disease.
Snake bites can occur during floods. If a snake has
bitten you, immediately seek medical help. If you are
around someone who was bitten by a snake:
seek medical help
immediately;
calmly talk to the person,
explain to them what is
happening and what you
are doing to help them,
because they might be
very anxious;
if you can, immobilize their body by putting them on
their left side with their head tilted to the side and
downwards and, especially, immobilize the bitten
limb with a splint or sling; and
do not touch, rub or massage, clean, or apply herbs
or chemicals to the wound, as this may introduce
infection, increase absorption of the venom and
increase local bleeding.
keep waste sealed in rubbish bins.
How can I make sure my
water is safe to drink?
Floodwater can potentially increase the
transmission of waterborne diseases, such as
cholera or hepatitis. To keep yourself and
your family healthy, follow this guidance.
How can I make sure my
food is safe to eat?
After a flood, there is a risk of illness from
eating food that is contaminated. To keep
yourself and your family healthy, do the
following.
If you can, boil water
before you use it for
drinking, brushing teeth,
cleaning wounds and
food preparation to
prevent the risk of
waterborne diseases.
Keep the hot water away from children to avoid
scalding. Cool and store boiled water in a clean,
covered container to avoid re-contamination.
Use tap water for other domestic purposes (e.g.
cleaning) and personal hygiene (e.g. handwashing,
showering), because it is safe to do so.
Keep your hands clean. Handwashing with soap is
important, especially before and during handling
food and after going to the toilet. To be effective,
wash your hands for 40–60 seconds with (unboiled)
water and soap, or 20–30 seconds with alcoholbased hand rub, if available.
In case tap water or other local water sources are
not available or safe, use bottled water if you can
access it. Make sure that the bottled water you drink
is properly sealed before you use it.
Do not leave cooked food
outside the refrigerator
for more than two hours.
Throw away perishable
and cooked foods that
have not been
refrigerated properly.
Do not leave cooked food outside the refrigerator for
more than two hours.
Avoid eating food that shows signs of spoilage or
has come in contact with contaminated water.
Plan when to eat different types of food. For
example, eat perishable food first.
Throw out all perishable foods in your fridge, such as
meat, poultry, fish and leftovers.
After four hours of a power cut, the following apply.
Never eat food to determine if it is safe. If in doubt,
throw it away.
In case you are unable to store, cook or reheat your
food properly, keep a stock of pre-packaged, tinned
or ready-to-eat food to eat, if possible.
Wash your hands with soap, especially before and
during handling food and after going to the toilet.
After the water has reached a rolling boil, remove
the pot or kettle from the heat and allow it to cool
naturally. Do not add ice.
What can I safely do when I
return home?
Even if floodwaters may be down in some
areas, many dangers can still exist. Do not
return home until advised by local
authorities. If you are advised that it is safe to
return home, follow the guidance below.
Never turn power on or
off or use an electric
appliance while standing
in water.
Have home gas and
electrical appliances
checked by qualified
professionals before
turning them on again.
Do not use petrol or diesel generators indoors.
Wear a face mask, rubber boots, waterproof gloves
and an apron while cleaning.
Leave doors and windows open whenever possible
and safe, to dry out your home.
Keep children away from flood-contaminated and
muddy areas until a week after the water has
receded.
are injured or have a
wound that can be
contaminated;
have influenza-like
symptoms, high fever,
have been bitten by
animals such as rats or
snakes;
When and how should I seek
medical assistance?
Flooding has significant health effects,
ranging from injuries to infectious diseases.
Seek medical assistance if you:
If you need to access a hospital:
have heart pain;
have a chronic disease and need medication;
have been exposed to chemicals or experience
symptoms such as burning eyes, difficulty breathing
or skin irritation; or
feel stressed and aggressive, have recurrent dreams
of flooding and are worried about returning floods.
remember – seriously injured and those with urgent
needs are prioritized; and
check official information to find out which hospitals
are functioning;
let health-care workers know if you have any
chronic medical conditions.
strong headache, heavy cough, strong diarrhoea
and/or vomiting, or heavy dizziness;
